was a good chemist you know he had worked with monsanto for a number of years and he had a research program going here and he was a nice person just a delightful show that by the time you get that grant there's more research that's right things are beginning to shape up now
And even our teaching load went way down, and since we started developing the graduate course I got more into senior and graduate courses.
And they did away with these small groups, you know, we just had large sections of roughly a hundred, and that greatly reduced our teaching loads.
Do you remember any reaction, you and your colleagues, when Earl Rudder was selected as the new president?
No.
I wasn't aware of any great reaction in the department or anything like that.
But Earl, well we only know that the guy revolutionized his campus.
And he was a great man.
I could pick up the phone, talk to Earl Rudd's secretary, and she would make an appointment with me for him.
There was never any question about it.
Did you ever go over Angela?
I went several times.
Describe that.
Well I don't, he was, you know, he was willing to hear what you had to say.
He himself didn't have a hell of a lot to say.
But he listened carefully to what you had to say and I noticed he took notes.
Now I greatly admired that, plus the fact that he was available.
Do you remember what you chatted with him about?
Well I told him that, this is a guess, but I remember the things that were on my mind, I remember telling him that
Texas, the state of Texas, had the largest petroleum industry and the largest chemical industry in the world, not only in the United States.
And Texas A&M, being a major school, should develop a first-class chemistry department.
What was his reaction?
Well, as I say, he listened very attentively.
took it in, made some notes.
Did he say yes, that it should be?
Well, I don't remember.
I'd be putting words in his mouth.
But all I can say is the man seriously paid attention to what you had to say.
And as he was leading to these changes here on the campus, what did you and your colleagues think about coeducation and integration?
Oh, everybody was very much in favor of coeducation and integration.
I can't think of anybody that was not.
You want a little bit of a story that upset me?
Yes.
One of my old, one of the first colleagues I met when I came here, and I shan't give his name, but he was a guy who had been here many, many years.
Texas A&M played Boston College, I remember, in the 50s sometime.
And Boston College had some black players.
And this guy made the remark on Monday morning after the Saturday football game, I never thought I'd live to see a day that a nigger would be playing on Kyle Field.
That really made me feel upset.
Did anybody speak to him?
Oh no, this was just a conversation between him and me in the hall, on Monday after talking about the game.
The revelation of my pardon.
Do you remember any events in your classes or in the hallway of the first blacks or the first women?
No.
Everything was very smoothly.
Underwent the change.
No problems whatsoever.
What about the change in the name from the A&M College of Texas to Texas A&M University?
Well I think most people that there was a great change, you know.
I didn't get any feelings of it.
Do you remember a man named Zener?
Sure.
He was dean of the College of Science.
Came from Chicago?
In Pennsylvania?
I don't know.
Anyway, came from one of the big schools up in Ohio.
You know, Zener was a real physicist.
I mean an honest to goodness first class physicist.
When I'd call up to go see Zener, like I'm talking to you now, we never got to the situation, why are you here?
Nothing.
He would immediately get a piece of chalk.
go to the blackboard and tell me what do you think of this idea?"
And he'd talk physics for the whole damn time I left there and never getting to.
Well I think he was misplaced.
He was a true scientist and not even remotely.
However he was a breath of air, you know, a breath of fresh air as they say.
Now when you arrived, chemistry was a part of the School of Arts and Sciences.
I believe so.
And in 59, Frank Hubert was hired as the dean.
As things began to grow, do you feel chemistry was treated fairly, equitably?
They never had adequate facilities or money.
I mean, the man who made the change was Arthur Martell.
But I think Martell was hired by Rudder.
I think so.
He came in 67.
Do you have any idea how he was identified as the one?
Well no.
But I think this is important.
I think Rudder, together with, remember Dean Page?
While I was at Oak Ridge I wrote a letter to Dean Page.
You know I cut out some stuff out of the chemical and engineering news telling him essentially what I told Rudder.
The Texas A&M Chemistry Department, because of the importance of refining in the chemical industry in the state, should be up there.
Well, I understand, I don't know who got Arthur Martell here, but I understand he was given a white paper to do what the hell he wanted to do and that the administration would stand behind him financially.
Did you ever hear of whether or not there was any
external political or former student or industrial person or persons that encouraged, because like chemistry got far more encouragement than did physics.
Yeah.
Or biology.
Yeah, I know that.
All right.
Did you know of Martell before he came?
Oh, yes.
Yes, he's a very, very famous chemist.
No two ways about it.
And what was the reaction of the department when he came?
Well I think we're delighted to get him because you know we knew the guy was aggressive, that he had big plans and that he was the type of person that would put him into play.
Because I, Pete Rodriguez would tell me that when Martell wanted something and they'd turn him down, he would go with that letter to Rudder or whoever, to Dean or something, you know, I've got this letter here.
So you guys better honor your commitment.
But the department has become a first class department.
And I think it's largely due to Martell.
Now, the research facilities were still very limited when he got here.
No, well, they'd already, we got the new wing in 58, I think.
Oh, okay.
Yeah, we got the new wing in 58 when Callaway was there.
Okay.
And then, of course, you know, the construction went crazy after that.
We got two more new wings.
Was that, were those wings, when they were added, was there appropriate departmental input as to what should be in them?
Oh, I,
I don't know for a fact but I have every reason to think so, because Arthur Martell was into stuff, you know what I mean?
Well he would appoint, I remember, I was not a member, but he would appoint a building committee
And then we were asked, as faculty, what we thought the department needed in way of research facilities.
I remember, for example, that Art Isbell wanted high-pressure laboratories, you know, for safety reasons.
They were constructed in a very particular manner.
So, you know, so the things changed.
Things were great when Arthur became head.
Under Dr. Martell, did the department get together and discuss
direction and so forth?
Well, Arthur, I must say, was not democratic in his administration.
He was highly autocratic.
Yeah, he was not the chairman, he was the head.
No, he was the head, let there be no doubt about it.
Absolutely.
During those years, did you all get annual evaluations?
Yes, we did receive periodic evaluations and we had an evaluation committee.
Well I guess every department has it now.
A new faculty member is ready for promotion from assistant to associate and such.
And that's something that didn't exist prior to that time.
The department had just did it entirely on its own.
And do you remember when you became a full professor?
Yeah.
That's an interesting situation because I was on my two year leave at Oak Ridge.
Please describe that.
And the head of
The dean of science, you know, I can't remember his name, but we called him Curly, a wide haired guy with very wavy hair.
But he was kind of interested in promoting the scientific attributes of the university.
And while I was in Oak Ridge, I went there for a year and then asked for a second year, but they awarded me.
And I got this letter from him, or some kind of indication, whether it was a letter, a phone call or not.
He told me during the second year when I was supposed to come back, tell him he had been promoted, and I was getting a $200 a month raise.
And that $200 was a big raise.
It was about 19, when was that, about roughly 68 thereabouts.
So I think he felt that I was going to stay in Oak Ridge, you see.
But, heck, I had to be there if I wanted to.
Under Martell, who were some of the important faculty additions?
Well, many, but he brought Tsui, T-S-U-T-S-U-I, in, who was a very well-known organo-metallic chemist.
And, of course, he brought Derek Barton in.
He brought Ian Scott in.
There were more.
And then he got a lot of young fellows that had done very well, Burke Breider.
Schweikert already was here at the time.
During those years, late 60s, early 70s, in what areas was the chemistry department's strongest?
What fields of special services?
Well decidedly what we call the inorganic division, because he brought cotton in.
Now cotton was truly an international figure.
That's Albert Cotton from Harvard.
From MIT.
MIT.
Yeah, yeah.
He's been very happy here, Cotton.
Boy, and he's been a big asset to the department.
Yeah, I mean, you know, but I think now every division is well recognized.
I think the last time where we were ranked, I know in the top 15 in the country, and if Barton hadn't died we'd probably be going in top ten, maybe we'll see where we make it or not.
By the time Martell got here, where was the research money coming from?
Well, the people were, most of them were sufficiently well-known.
They were getting government grants, you know, NIH, and it's that phase.
So they bring it in themselves.
Yeah, yeah.
And when they came, these outstanding people, were they normally provided appropriate research space?
Oh, heavens, yes.
Yeah, if you were, you know,
I was displaced twice because he brought Tsutsui and he told me, oh yeah, give this guy new office.
He sent me off to the old state chemist building.
And then when the new building was done then he'd find a spot for me there, which he did, but he accommodated the new people.
Now in those years what were the advanced courses you were teaching?
well you don't need the course numbers, but the advanced inorganic chemistry, organometallic chemistry, those are the main ones.
I did teach a graduate course in analytical chemistry, but that's because our analytical division was weak at the time, but it greatly increased in prestige and competence.
But mostly graduate courses in organic chemistry, especially organometallic chemistry.
Those advanced courses, what kind of students were taking those?
Graduate students, strictly graduate students.
But the junior or senior that you taught, were they all chemists?
Oh yeah, they're virtually all chemistry majors.
And also if we got new graduate students from a smaller liberal arts college where they didn't get advanced courses, they would take those for graduate credit.
How has the makeup of the graduate student body changed in these 30 years or so?
Where were they from originally and where now?
The transition has been that we have virtually, I don't know what the percentage is, but a very large fraction of foreign students.
But it's not just we.
I think it's a national situation because you pay a
somebody a thousand dollars a month to handle a couple of like, you know, lab sessions, and they come from India or China, this is pretty darn good money.
Plus they want to come because of the prestige of doing graduate work in the United States.
Originally the first graduate students you had here were from where?
They were American guys.
Were they most of them A&M undergraduates?
At the very start mostly, but it quickly changed.
I had Mary Janian from Florida.
Oh heck, I can't go over all of them.
A lot of them came from the smaller Texas schools.
We did a great deal of recruiting.
We'd go to visit little schools in Texas.
I remember going to, was it Wesleyan in Fort Worth?
Texas Wesleyan.
Texas Wesleyan, went up to Northeast Texas, the Texas Baptist, I think that's the name.
But we used to go traveling around a lot, giving talks and recruiting students.
Is there any graduate student that you remember from your early days with great pride?
Well, the one who's been most successful, gee, I should know his name, but he became professor at Purdue.
And has done very well.
Very bright kid.
Did he do his doctoral degree with you?
With me, uh-huh.
And then another fellow that I had early on became director of...
Monsanto's fiber division, you know, synthetic fiber division in Anniston, Alabama or thereabouts.
Where did they do their undergraduate, do you remember?
Well no.
One, University of Wichita.
And the other fellow came from a small Texas.
No, no, he came from May and Em, that's right.
Yeah, yeah.
And as this change came about, what international, what nations or regions are most numerous here in the country?
Oh, well, India and China, that's for sure.
Absolutely.
Mainland China.
Lately mostly mainland, but we used to be mostly Taiwan.
And then it became mainland, you know.
Yes.
Do you remember some pioneer female graduate students?
Yeah, R.V.
Jean Caulfield.
I remember her.
Because she was from Uvalde.
And I was told that she was the women's pistol champion or something like that in the state or national, but she's supposed to be a whiz-bang with the pistol.
Then another girl who's now running her own company in California, Mitchell, she extracts stuff from natural products and made money, she's making money producing
natural product derivatives.
How did you and a doctoral student tend to kind of link up that this student would do his or her work for you?
Well, the way they worked it, a student, when he came in, would simply meet.
Well, they'd first decide which division they wanted to work in.
Then they'd talk with each faculty member.
You'd tell them about the problems you had, the research problems on which you were working.
And then it was up to them.
Availability of funds had something to do with it.
If you had a research branch, they could put you on a research, you know, or pay so much a month in research, they usually cared for that because they didn't have to teach.
All right, so in general, their research topic was closely related to your research project.
Absolutely.
Oh, yeah.
And normally, back in the 60s and 70s, how long did it take a student to do a doctoral degree?
I'd say the average was five years.
It seemed like most of them took about five years.
Would that include a master's also?
It depends.
A student who was a doctoral student usually went right through.
If a situation presented itself, which indicated he would have some problems, they'd probably settle.
It was sort of a settlement, well I'll get a master's degree and leave.
Do you have some happy and or sad anecdotes about working with graduate students?
Well, I don't have too many.
But, well, I got a very unbelievable one.
I had one graduate student.
He never did get his degree.
I say that ahead of time because what he did was inexcusable.
He was quite bright, actually.
He was working on a research project, and I said, we ought to present this at this meeting.
The meeting was in Philadelphia.
So we prepared an abstract, sent it in.
It was accepted.
The time of his presentation was given.
I bought him an airline ticket, made a hotel reservation.
Okay.
Presumably he went.
A few days later, I see him.
Well, how was the talk?
How was the meeting?
Oh, just fine.
Everything went great.
Any questions?
Yeah, I answered them with no trouble.
OK, good, fine.
A week later, I got a letter from the chairman of that group, of that division, saying we had acted totally unprofessionally, failing to show up to give our talk.
I had no idea.
This guy said he went there, he flew there.
Did you call him in?
Oh yeah, I called him in.
What did he say?
He gave me some ridiculous story that there was another convention going on there, hosiery or some dadgum thing like that, and he'd gone to the wrong place to get to talk.
But he never did finish him.
He had the name, the name I shan't give because I would identify him, of a very famous electrical engineer.
I mean a name that you would recognize instantly.
But he had problems.
This guy had psychological problems shortly after his wife divorced him and I don't know what happened to him.
But that story is one I shan't forget.
What about any sad realities?
Oh yeah, unfortunately.
I had a student.
And he was ready, he'd been around four or five years, finally.
I said, okay, I think you've done enough.
Write it up and finish it.
And suddenly I hear that this guy's family came to pick him up from Florida.
And a few weeks later he's dead.
I never did find out what happened to this boy, a nice chap.
Now there's all kinds of sad stories, good Lord.
Some of them are funny.
Maybe I'd rather hear one of those, huh?
Yeah, yeah.
This one guy is the guy who ended up going to Purdue and he's a full professor now, doing very well.
But I had him on a research grant.
He simply never came in to do research.
So I finally said his name was Jim.
After a few months, I said, Jim, you know, you can't possibly get your research done if you simply don't come and work.
And he says, you know, I never thought about that.
But we got that straightened out, and he turned out to be a crackerjack.
But as far as undergraduates,
I have one interest, two interesting stories.
I think I told you these in an informal conversation, but they're the stories I remember.
Good, good.
This one boy was in my large class.
Dr. Martell was the head then.
He was in the Corps, and I'm at my desk.
And Dr. Martell comes in with this fellow and he says, Mr. and so-and-so here claims that you are prejudiced against the court, that you grade them more harshly than you do the non-court students.
And I got pissed.
Because I got up and I said, that's simply a lie.
And I told this kid, I said, you know, that's just not true.
I took out my grade book and I said, here,
I don't even know whether you're in the Corps or not.
If Joe Smith got a 78, and I've given 78 speech, everybody that's got a 78 speaks.
Here's my cutoff for Ds and Cs, and everybody gets treated the same way.
And I says, you know, I challenged that guy to a fight.
I says, you know, that is a lie, and you're getting, you bring him with my department, and I says, I really don't like that.
So I don't know what happened, but he walked out.
So I never saw this kid anymore, nor did any more come of it.
But I go into Kroger one day, this was six months or a year later, and I see him working.
He was working.
And I says, why in heaven's name did you complain about my grading and you bring in my department head?
You know, it's a very unpleasant situation.
I said, what cost you to do that?
And he says, well, my outfit wanted to get the top grades.
And I was doing what I was told to do to try to get the best grades for my outfit.
He was very nice at the time and he apologized.
And he said, okay.
I said, I'm glad to hear that.
And then there's a nice story, which is a little more pleasant than that one, and this pretty girl, about 1975,
very attractive girl.
I know she was from down the valley.
She came in at the end of the semester after the grades were out and she said, you gave me a C. Is there any way I can make a B?
I said, well, you know, once I give out the grades and the distribution is made, I said, you had whatever it was, I said, you need two more points?
If I give you two more points, I'm going to give everybody else two more points.
I just can't do that.
Once I draw the line, that's it.
She didn't want to leave and she kept
pounding me and demanding, not demanding, but indicating how important it was for her to get a B. Started crying.
Fortunately, I was told to keep the door open when I had a female student, which I had, the door was open, starts crying.
And I don't remember her name.
I said, just, what is it?
And then she stopped crying.
But it was a long time she hung around.
I said, I just can't do it.
I said, but how come you, I said, you know what I'm going to do?
I'm going to call your dean.
I'm curious to know how you're getting along.
I called her dean.
And she was doing well.
You know, she was, no problems with getting thrown out or being on probation.
So, you're doing okay.
I says, what is the problem that you're, and she says, well,
If I had gotten a B, my father promised to give me a Chrysler convertible.
But now I'm only going to get a Pinto.
And so help me, this is a true story.
Oh now that's a great one.
That's a great one.
But really what happens to these kids, you know.
Did you ever get any phone calls in the middle of the night?
No.
Another interesting story, I broke my rule.
So I drew the line, that was it.
But this one fellow comes in.
This one fellow comes in.
He's married with two kids.
He's here for about seven years trying to get a bachelor's degree.
He says he's got a job in engineering.
He shows me his job offer.
I says, what's the point?
He says, I'm taking Chemistry 102 for the fifth time and I can't pass it.
He says, I can't get my degree.
These people won't honor their offer for a job unless I pass it.
I passed them.
I figured, good Lord, what in the hell?
We can't keep this guy here forever.
He's done everything else.
I called the dean of engineering.
He's completed all the requirements.
This course has gotten baffled.
It's a psychological block for him.
So I gave him a D, and he got through.
That, I broke my rigid
But that one time in 40 years doesn't seem too bad to me.
And I think it was justified.
As you really got immersed in the department, who were your closest buddies?
Oh without question there was one.
A crystallographer who's retired.
He retired a few years after I did.
Ed Meyers.
M-E-Y-E-R-S.
Who I thought was just a very, very competent scientist.
And we worked together for year in and year out.
We published lots of joint papers.
He was without question the closest.
And I had Kurt Ergolic, I don't know if you remember him.
I-R-G-O-L-I-C.
He died a few years ago in a tragic accident.
Was it K-U-R-T?
Kurt, yeah, Kurt Johann Ergolic, Austrian guy.
But he came in 64 as a post-doc with me and stayed here and did extremely well, extremely well.
He became head of the Center for Energy and Mineral Resources,
And we did just a huge amount of research together.
He was just a guy that was competent, easy to work with.
But he was never friendly, you know what I mean?
But professionally we got along beautifully.
Well who were coffee drinking and our lunch buddies?
Oh yeah, Ed Meyers and then a few from Dr. Martell's group, especially this poor chap that died not long ago, a very tragic, Joe Modokitis, he died about two years ago, or a year, I forget, but he was a young man.
Well relatively, he was 60.
Where would you all drink coffee at?
Right down the hall.
One of the offices was a place for you with the coffee partners.
Not an office and you sat around.
Then lunch.
Lunch?
What did I do?
I usually didn't do lunch on any kind of a regular basis.
I think I used to go home for lunch.
All right let's go back.
You rented an apartment at first, and then where'd you all buy a house?
We bought a house there in the new addition then towards the high school, Southwood?
Towards the high school.
In 1970 I bought a house.
Thirty-five thousand bucks.
about an acre, I think, in San Jose, California, go for 700,000.
No, I'm not kidding, because my daughter lived in San Jose, and unbelievable, the price of real estate there.
And now looking back, what was it like for your children to grow up in this community?
Oh, I think it was very delightful.
I think they enjoyed school.
They did well.
They participated in extracurricular activities.
And I think they got a decent education here.
In the 60s and 70s, did you think of this as a comparatively safe community?
Yeah, I did.
Uh-huh.
I certainly did.
And what did you and your family, what did you all do in the community?
Now to bring that up I'm going to tell you something.
My wife says that they used to be here, doesn't exist anymore.
What's that?
Availability of golf and tennis
without any questions or money for faculty wives, they don't do that anymore, do they?
I don't think so.
Yeah, but she said that you ought to restore that.
I agree.
Did you all get involved in community?
Not that way.
No, but did you all go to Opus?
Oh, that sort of thing.
Yeah we went to Opus but not all of them.
You know some football games we did do.
I liked that.
Baseball games.
In fact they'd get season tickets for baseball.
What are some of your favorite football game memories?
Well I saw the game with TCU when Brad Bryant was the coach, the 7-6 game, I don't know if you remember that one or not.
It was a horrible day weather-wise.
That was a magnificent game and well some of them were.
But I remember that, and Tony Franklin was in my class.
And Tony, through his coach, got me invited up to a TCU game.
That's the only time I've ever flown first class on an airplane.
That went to that one.
And I got to know a very nice man, our former basketball coach.